**Unit 9: Issues and Ethics in Psychological Intervention** <span
id="9"></span> 
*This final unit does not deal directly with mental disorders, but
rather with other important issues directly tied to the effectiveness of
mental health interventions. The unit will begin by discussing the role
of culture in therapy and current inequities in treatment. Next, it will
cover the importance of confidentiality without which clinical and
counseling psychologists might not be effective. At the close of this
unit, you should have a general sense of the ethical issues involved
with treatment both in respects to equality of treatment across cultural
groups and in the ethical issues surrounding confidentiality.*

**Unit 9 Time Advisory**  
Completing this unit should take you approximately 1.75 hours.  
  
 ☐    Subunit 9.1: 0.75 hours  
  
 ☐    Subunit 9.2: 1 hour

**Unit9 Learning Outcomes**  
Upon successful completion of this unit, you will be able to:  
-   demonstrate an awareness of the role of culture in therapy; and  
      
-   discuss the ethical considerations related to confidentiality in the
    practice of psychotherapy.

**9.1 Culture and Psychology** <span id="9.1"></span> 
-   **Reading: United States Department of Health and Human Services’
    *MentalHealth: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999)*: “Chapter 2:
    The Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness”**
    Link: United States Department of Health and Human Services’
    *Mental*Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): [“Chapter 2:
    The Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental
    Illness”](https://resources.saylor.org/wwwresources/archived/site/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/psych205-2.2.pdf) **(PDF)  
        
     Instructions: Read the section titled “Overview of Cultural
    Diversity and Mental Health Services.” Please note that the pages in
    the PDF bar at the top of the document do not match the pages in the
    table of contents section on the first page.  
      
     This reading will also cover the topics outlined for Subunits
    9.1.1–9.1.5, which collectively address the intersection between
    culture and psychology. This reading will highlight the
    discrepancies in the quality of mental healthcare across cultural
    groups.   
        
     Reading this text and taking notes should take approximately 45
    minutes.  
        
     Terms of Use: This material is part of the public domain. 

**9.1.1 Introduction to Cultural Diversity and Demographics** <span
id="9.1.1"></span> 
*Since the U.S. mental health system is not well equipped to adequately
meet the needs of racial/ethnic minorities, several issues arise in
terms of cultural diversity and mental health services. There are
problems with classifications and identification with culture/cultural
identity, differences in economic/social/political status, and various
coping styles regarding life problems.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 80–83 for
additional information.*

**9.1.2 Family and Community as Resources** <span id="9.1.2"></span> 
*Many individuals use family and community as resources for managing
mental health and mental illness. However, there are racial/ethnic
differences in family solidarity and support systems, and also group
disparities in treatment.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 83–86 for
additional information.*

**9.1.3 Barriers to Treatment Delivery** <span id="9.1.3"></span> 
*There are many treatment barriers racial and ethnic minority groups
encounter when seeking assistance for mental health and mental illness
management. Barriers result from cultural, financial, organizational,
and diagnostic differences, as well as help-seeking behavior, mistrust,
stigma, cost, and clinician bias.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 86–88 for
additional information.*

**9.1.4 Improving Treatment for Minority Groups** <span
id="9.1.4"></span> 
*Given there are numerous barriers for minority groups seeking mental
health support and mental illness treatment, improvements must be
made in order to adequately assist minority groups. Treatment programs
should engage in ethnopsychopharmacology, offer minority-oriented
services, and understand cultural competence.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 88–91 for
additional information.*

**9.1.5 Rural Mental Health Services** <span id="9.1.5"></span> 
*In addition to minority-group barriers to seeking mental health and
mental illness treatment, there are also issues regarding rural mental
health services. In comparison to urban mental health services, rural
individuals experience geographic, cultural, and political barriers that
can interfere with their receiving of mental health treatment.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pg. 92 for additional
information.*

**9.2 Confidentiality** <span id="9.2"></span> 
-   **Reading: United States Department of Health and Human Services’
    *MentalHealth: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999)*: "Chapter 7:
    Confidentiality of Mental Health Information: Ethical, Legal, and
    Policy Issues"**
    Link: United States Department of Health and Human Services’
    *Mental*Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):** ["Chapter
    7: Confidentiality of Mental Health Information: Ethical, Legal, and
    Policy
    Issues"](https://resources.saylor.org/wwwresources/archived/site/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/psych205-ch7.pdf) (PDF)  
        
     Instructions: Read Chapter 7 titled “Confidentiality of Mental
    Health Information: Ethical, Legal, and Policy Issues.”   
      
     This reading will also cover the topics outlined in Subunits
    9.2.1–9.2.7.  
        
     Reading this text and taking notes should take approximately 1
    hour.  
        
     Terms of Use: This material is part of the public domain. 

**9.2.1 Ethical Issues Regarding Confidentiality** <span
id="9.2.1"></span> 
*There are many standards regarding confidentiality and ethical
practices involved in mental services treatment. It is important to
understand that confidentiality is not an absolute value and many
policies and laws provide support for ethical considerations involving
confidentiality.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 7:
Confidentiality of Mental Health Information: Ethical, Legal, and Policy
Issues,” pages 437–439 for additional information.*

**9.2.2 Values Underlying Confidentiality** <span id="9.2.2"></span> 
*The values underlying confidentiality examine reducing stigma,
fostering trust, and protecting privacy as principles of
confidentiality.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 7:
Confidentiality of Mental Health Information: Ethical, Legal, and Policy
Issues,” pages 439–440 for additional information.*

**9.2.3 Research on Confidentiality and Mental Health Treatment** <span
id="9.2.3"></span> 
*Research on confidentiality and mental health treatment supports
underlying assumptions that individuals seeking treatment may be
less likely to ask for help or disclose sensitive information for fear
of privacy not being kept.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 7:
Confidentiality of Mental Health Information: Ethical, Legal, and Policy
Issues,” pages 440–441 for additional information.*

**9.2.4 Current State of Confidentiality Law** <span id="9.2.4"></span> 
*The current state of federal and state confidentiality laws illustrates
the need for change. At present, there is a lack of legal
framework/national standards for confidentiality of health care
information. Likewise, there are differences in state laws.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 7:
Confidentiality of Mental Health Information: Ethical, Legal, and Policy
Issues,” pages 441–442 for additional information.*

**9.2.5 Exceptions to Confidentiality** <span id="9.2.5"></span> 
*Given that there are differences in state confidentiality laws, each
state can thus create exceptions to confidentiality. These exceptions
may include consent by individual in treatment, disclosure to
client/other providers/payers/families/law enforcement agencies/third
parties, and disclosure for reporting and research.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 7:
Confidentiality of Mental Health Information: Ethical, Legal, and Policy
Issues,” pages 442–445 for additional information.*

**9.2.6 Federal Confidentiality Laws** <span id="9.2.6"></span> 
*Any individual seeking mental health or mental illness treatment risks
discrimination, invasion of privacy, or even criminal prosecution if
that information is disclosed to third parties. In an effort to mitigate
these issues, federal confidentiality laws protect patients’ rights
while they are receiving treatment (e.g., Americans with Disabilities
Act). However, there are certain situations (e.g., disclosure to law
enforcement where a crime was committed) when information must be
released.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 7:
Confidentiality of Mental Health Information: Ethical, Legal, and Policy
Issues,” pages 446–447 for additional information.*

**9.2.7 Potential Problems with the Current Legal Framework** <span
id="9.2.7"></span> 
*There are many problems with our current legal framework regarding
protection of health care information. There is a lack of uniformity
(e.g., state vs. federal differences), lack of reform provisions,
preemption, separation of legal standards for mental health
confidentiality, and substance/alcohol use confidentiality issues.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 7:
Confidentiality of Mental Health Information: Ethical, Legal, and Policy
Issues,” pages 447–449 for additional information.*

**The Saylor Foundation’s “Unit 9 Assessment”** <span
id="9.2.8"></span> 
-   **Assessment: The Saylor Foundation’s “Unit 9 Assessment”**
    Link: The Saylor Foundation’s [“Unit 9
    Assessment”](http://school.saylor.org/mod/quiz/view.php?id=1428)  
      
     Instructions: Complete this unit assessment. For each question,
    pick the best possible answer. The correct answers will be displayed
    when you click the "Submit" button.  
      
     You must be logged into your Saylor Foundation School account in
    order to access this quiz.  If you do not yet have an account, you
    will be able to create one, free of charge, after clicking the
    link.  
      
     Completing this assessment should take approximately 15 minutes.

**Final Exam** <span id="10"></span> 
-   **Final Exam: The Saylor Foundation’s “PSYCH205 Final Exam”**
    Link: The Saylor Foundation’s [“PSYCH205 Final
    Exam”](http://school.saylor.org/mod/quiz/view.php?id=1397)  
      
     Instructions: You must be logged into your Saylor Foundation
    account in order to access this exam. If you do not yet have an
    account, you will be able to create one, free of charge, after
    clicking the link.


