**Unit 2: The Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness** <span
id="2"></span> 
*This unit will provide you with an overview of mental illness, its
manifestations, and its diagnoses. It will also cover the topic of
etiology (the causes or origin of mental illness) and identify the
factors that may influence and contribute to the development of mental
illness. You will study methods of mental illness prevention and
treatment—two primary concerns in the clinical psychology practice.
Next, this unit will address the current state of the mental health
services delivery system in the United States, as it is important to
understand the context within which treatment delivery takes place.
Finally, this unit will work to define recovery, the goal of
intervention. What constitutes* *recovery? How do you know when it has
been achieved?*

**Unit 2 Time Advisory**  
Completing this unit should take you approximately 4 hours.  
  
 ☐    Introduction: 1.5 hours  
  
 ☐    Subunit 2.1: 0.5 minutes  
  
 ☐    Subunit 2.2: 2 hours

**Unit2 Learning Outcomes**  
Upon successful completion of this unit, you will be able to:  
-   -   define the criteria for what is considered *abnormal* versus
        *normal*, and explain how these definitions fit into the notion
        that psychopathology exists on a continuum;
    -   identify the clusters of symptoms that manifest in mental
        illness;
    -   describe the components of the biopsychosocial model of disease;
        and
    -   describe the state of mental health service utilization in the
        United States, including its historical context, current
        patterns, and outcomes of interest.

-   **Lecture: iTunesU: "What Is Abnormal?” and “What Is Abnormal?”**
    The Saylor Foundation does not yet have materials for this portion
    of the course. If you are interested in contributing your content to
    fill this gap or aware of a resource that could be used here, please
    submit it here.

    [Submit Materials](/contribute/)

**2.1 Abnormal Psychology** <span id="2.1"></span> 
-   **Reading: University of Central Oklahoma: Professor Caleb Lack’s
    *Abnormal Psychology: An e-text!*: “The Nature of Psychopathology
    and Abnormal Psychology”**
    Link: University of Central Oklahoma: Professor Caleb Lack’s
    *Abnormal Psychology: An e-text!*:  ["The Nature of Psychopathology
    and Abnormal Psychology"](http://abnormalpsych.wikispaces.com/)  
        
     Instructions: Please click on the link above, select the link to
    “The Nature of Psychopathology and Abnormal Psychology,” and read
    this article. This reading will clarify the factors that clinical
    psychologist use to address the question of “what is abnormal?” This
    reading will cover all topics outlined for Subunits 2.1.1–2.1.6.  
        
     Reading this text and taking notes should take approximately 30
    minutes.  
        
     Terms of Use: This material is licensed under a Creative Commons
    Attribution Share-Alike Non-Commercial 3.0 License.

**2.1.1 The Nature of Mental Disorders** <span id="2.1.1"></span> 
*The nature of mental disorders can be difficult to ascertain.
Scientific vs. socially constructed aspects indicate multiple components
of mental disorder development. As such, there is no single, agreed upon
operational definition of mental disorder etiology.  
  
 Refer to the “Nature of Psychopathology and Abnormal
Psychology” article for additional information.*

**2.1.2 Mental Disorders as Statistical Deviance** <span
id="2.1.2"></span> 
*Mental disorders as statistical deviance involve comparing an
individual’s behavior to the frequency of occurrence of the same
behavior in the general population. However, there are issues with this
definition, specifically social norms, subjectivity, and extreme sides
of a normal curve.  
  
 Refer to the “Nature of Psychopathology and Abnormal
Psychology” article for additional information.*

**2.1.3 Mental Disorders as Social Deviance** <span id="2.1.3"></span> 
*Mental disorders as social deviance states behavior is deemed abnormal
if it deviates from social standards, values, and the norms of an
individual’s culture. However, there are issues with this definition,
specifically little to no objective validity, the timeframe of
acceptable behavior can change, and there are different morals/standards
among disparate culture groups.  
  
 Refer to the “Nature of Psychopathology and Abnormal Psychology”
article for additional information.*

**2.1.4 Mental Disorders as Maladaptive Behavior** <span
id="2.1.4"></span> 
*Mental disorders as maladaptive behavior attempts to classify as
mental disorders those behaviors that are dysfunctional (i.e.,
effectiveness/ineffectiveness of a behavior in dealing with challenges
or accomplishing goals). However, there are issues with this definition
since there are four different types of maladaptive behaviors and each
type has inherent issues.  
  
 Refer to the “Nature of Psychopathology and Abnormal
Psychology” article for additional information.*

**2.1.5 Dimensional versus Categorical Models of Mental Disorders**
<span id="2.1.5"></span> 
*Mental disorders can be compared using dimensional (i.e., continuum)
or categorical (i.e., polarized) models. That is, mental disorders are
just extreme variations of normal psychological
phenomena/problems. However, there are issues with this definition, such
as there is large scientific support but it doesn’t mesh with real world
instances.  
  
 Refer to the “Nature of Psychopathology and Abnormal
Psychology” article for additional information. *

**2.1.6 Mental Disorders as Social Constructions** <span
id="2.1.6"></span> 
*Mental disorders as social constructions state disorders are products
of history and culture and should be defined in a universal,
scientific construct. However, there are issues with this definition
such that it implies the construct is fake or unimportant.  
  
 Refer to the “Nature of Psychopathology and Abnormal
Psychology” article for additional information.*

**2.2 Manifestations of Mental Illness** <span id="2.2"></span> 
-   **Reading: United States Department of Health and Human Services’
    *MentalHealth: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999)*: “Chapter 2:
    The Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness”**
    Link: United States Department of Health and Human Services’
    *MentalHealth: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999)*: [“Chapter 2:
    The Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental
    Illness”](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/psych205-2.2.pdf) (PDF)  
        
     Instructions: Read the “Overview of Mental Illness” through the
    “Overview of Mental Health Services,” excluding “Overview of
    Treatment.” Next, read the “Overview of Recovery” and “Conclusions”
    sections. Please note that the pages in the PDF bar at the top of
    the document do not match the pages in the table of contents section
    on the first page. This reading will cover all of the remaining
    topics in unit 2 (subunits 2.2–2.7).   
        
     Reading this text and taking notes should take approximately 2
    hours.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

**2.2.1 Anxiety** <span id="2.2.1"></span> 
*Anxiety is the most readily accessible and easily understood of all
mental disorders, since it is a vitally important physiological response
to dangerous situations. There are seven common signs of acute anxiety,
and anxiety can also manifest in more severe mental disorders such as
OCD or PTSD.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human
Services’ Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):
“Chapter 2: The Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages
40–41 for additional information.*

**2.2.2 Psychosis** <span id="2.2.2"></span> 
*Psychosis can be described as disturbances of perception and thought
process. Determining if an individual suffers from psychosis varies with
cultural context. A more prominent type of psychosis is schizophrenia
whereby individuals suffer from hallucinations and/or delusions, in
addition to other various positive and negative symptoms.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):  “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 41–42 for
additional information.*

**2.2.3 Disturbance of Mood** <span id="2.2.3"></span> 
*Mood disturbances can be difficult to define due to scientific problems
in quantifiable measurement as well as cultural differences. There are
many common signs of mood disorders with those signs
characteristically manifesting as either a sustained feeling of sadness
or sustained elevation of mood.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human
Services’ Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):
“Chapter 2: The Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages
42–43 for additional information.*

**2.2.4 Disturbance of Cognition** <span id="2.2.4"></span> 
*Disturbances of cognition refer to difficulties in the ability to
organize, process, and recall information. This can occur in a variety
of disorders such as dementia, depression, or schizophrenia.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):  “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 43 for
additional information.*

**2.2.5 Other Symptoms** <span id="2.2.5"></span> 
*Although anxiety, psychosis, mood disturbances, and cognitive
impairments are the most common of mental disorders, other somatic
and/or physical symptoms or impairment of impulse control can manifest
in an individual.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):  “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pg. 43 for additional
information.*

**2.3 Diagnosis and Epidemiology of Mental Illness** <span
id="2.3"></span> 
**2.3.1 Diagnosis of Mental Illness** <span id="2.3.1"></span> 
*Diagnosing mental illness can be difficult due to categories being
broad, heterogeneous, and overlapping. Given these issues, a systematic
approach (i.e., DSM IV) has been developed to standardize mental illness
classification.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 43–45 for
additional information.*

**2.3.2 Overview of Etiology** <span id="2.3.2"></span> 
*The precise cause of mental disorders is not known but broad
etiological aspects have been identified (e.g., biological,
psychological, social/cultural factors). The manifestation of mental
disorders is an interaction amongst these broad aspects.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 49–50 for
additional information.*

**2.3.3 Biopsychosocial Model of Disease** <span id="2.3.3"></span> 
*The Biopsychosocial Model of Disease is a framework developed by George
L. Engle that states biopsychosocial factors are involved in the causes,
manifestation, course, and outcome of health and disease. However, there
are issues with this model including degree of factorial influence,
degree of interaction, and variation across individuals and life
spans.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 50–51 for
additional information.*

**2.3.4 Understanding Correlation, Causation, and Consequences** <span
id="2.3.4"></span> 
*Correlation determines mental illness risk factors but does not mean
causation. The consequences of mental illness are considered later
outcomes of a disorder.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 51–52 for
additional information.*

**2.3.5 Biological Influences on Mental Health and Mental Illness**
<span id="2.3.5"></span> 
*The biological influences on mental health and mental illness are
varied, including genetics, infections, physical trauma, nutrition,
hormones, and toxins.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 52–53 for
additional information.*

**2.4 Psychosocial Influences on Mental Health and Mental Illness**
<span id="2.4"></span> 
**2.4.1 Psychodynamic Theories** <span id="2.4.1"></span> 
*Psychodynamic theories assert that behavior is the product of
underlying conflicts over which people are not aware, and these deviant
behaviors influence mental health and mental illness. Note especially
how Sigmund Freud’s work contributes to a historical perspective of
mental health theory and treatment approaches.  
    
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 55–56 for
additional information.*

**2.4.2 Behavior and Social Learning Theories** <span
id="2.4.2"></span> 
*Behavior and social learning theories assert that personality is the
sum of an individual’s observable responses to the outside world. Note
especially, views from Watson and Skinner (i.e., rejection of the
existence of underlying conflicts and unconscious, operant
conditioning), Pavlov (i.e., classical conditioning), and Bandura (i.e.,
social learning theory).  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 56–57 for
additional information.*

**2.4.3 The Integrative Science of Mental Illness and Health** <span
id="2.4.3"></span> 
*The integrative science of mental illness and health focuses on
understanding how findings from different mental health field
disciplines have many common threads. There has been a progressive
movement to promote linkages between various areas and principles.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pg. 57 for additional
information.*

**2.5 Overview of Development, Temperament, and Risk Factors** <span
id="2.5"></span> 
**2.5.1 Physical Development** <span id="2.5.1"></span> 
*The physical development of our nervous system provides the
foundation for mental function (i.e., cognition, mood, and intentional
behavior). Note the four overarching findings/organizing principles
extrapolated from research that categorize neuronal development and the
implications these findings have on mental health and mental illness.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):  “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 57–59 for
additional information. *

**2.5.2 Psychological Development: Piaget** <span id="2.5.2"></span> 
*Jean Piaget’s theory on psychological development focuses on
cognitive development as a process, where each stage of
development precedes a previous stage in a fixed pattern.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):  “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pg.59 for additional
information.*

**2.5.3 Psychological Development: Erik Erikson** <span
id="2.5.3"></span> 
*Erik Erikson’s psychoanalytic developmental theory is an expansion
of Freud’s original theory of psychosexual development. Erikson
supports the notion that development unfolds throughout the lifespan
whereby each life stage presents its own challenges and opportunities
for growth.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2:  The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 59–60
for additional information.*

**2.5.4 John Bowlby** <span id="2.5.4"></span> 
*John Bowlby’s attachment theory of development is a reinterpretation of
Freud’s original theory of psychosexual development. Bowlby
theorized that attachment has a biological basis in need for survival.  
  
 Refer to The United States Department of Health and Human
Services’ Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):
“Chapter 2:  The Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pg.
60 for additional information.*

**2.6 Overview of Prevention** <span id="2.6"></span> 
**2.6.1 Definition of Prevention** <span id="2.6.1"></span> 
*Preventing an illness from occurring is better than treating an illness
after onset, and this notion has been the foundation in multiple fields,
including those specific to mental health and mental illness. Note that
there are varying levels of prevention from primary, secondary, and
tertiary and there are also issues with these definitions (e.g.,
different meanings to different people and different fields of
health).  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 62–63 for
additional information.*

**2.6.2 Risk Factors and Protective Factors** <span id="2.6.2"></span> 
*Understanding the concepts of risk and protective factors is central to
many prevention programs. Risk factors increase an individual’s
likelihood of illness or disease development whereas protective factors
increase an individual’s likelihood of not developing an illness or
disease. Note the differentiation and interaction of these factors and
how they affect the identifications and treatment in a population.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999): “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 63–64 for
additional information.*

**2.7 Mental Health Services** <span id="2.7"></span> 
**2.7.1 Patterns of Use** <span id="2.7.1"></span> 
*The settings for individuals using mental health services
include institutional, community-based, and home-based options. Note
the percentage of people who use mental health services and where
received (e.g., general sector, specialty sector).  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):  “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 73–75 for
additional information.*

**2.7.2 History of Mental Health Services** <span id="2.7.2"></span> 
*The origins of mental health services in the United States can be
traced back to colonial America and has progressed through the
years, influenced by national and international wars, urbanization, and
health care reform. Examine the historical origins of mental health
services systems, the origins of treatment, and policy
interventions/measures.              
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human
Services’ Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):
“Chapter 2: The Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages
75–80 for additional information.*

**2.7.3 Overview of Recovery** <span id="2.7.3"></span> 
*Recovery from mental illness has a substantial impact on
various populations, including consumers and families, mental health
research, and service delivery. Note how the promotion of recovery
process impacts each section and issues with the recovery process, such
as problems with definitions and measurements.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):  “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 97–100 for
additional information.*

**2.7.4 Mental Health and Mental Illness across the Lifespan** <span
id="2.7.4"></span> 
*Mental health and mental illness should be considered as
continuing across the lifespan, since they are dynamic, ever-changing
phenomena influenced by developmental stages and society.  
  
 Refer to the United States Department of Health and Human Services’
Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General (1999):  “Chapter 2: The
Fundamentals of Mental Health and Mental Illness,” pages 102–104 for
additional information.*

**Assessment: The Saylor Foundation’s “Unit 2 Assessment”** <span
id="2.7.5"></span> 
-   **Assessment: The Saylor Foundation’s “Unit 2 Assessment”**
    Link: The Saylor Foundation’s [“Unit 2
    Assessment”](http://school.saylor.org/mod/quiz/view.php?id=1421)  
      
     Instructions: Complete this unit assessment. For each question,
    pick the best possible answer. The correct answers will be displayed
    when you click the "Submit" button.  
      
     You must be logged into your Saylor Foundation School account in
    order to access this quiz.  If you do not yet have an account, you
    will be able to create one, free of charge, after clicking the
    link.  
      
     Completing this assessment should take approximately 15 minutes.


